title: Reintroducing GUI FTW and Progress Report
date: 2011-05-16
tags: [GUI FTW, Clojure, event handling]

&&&

I meant this post to be a simple translation of
[this](niech-sie-stanie-gui-ftw.html) but some things changed that are
worth mentioning.

&&&

**GUI FTW!** is a *declarative* GUI library. I've borrowed concepts
from the Web (the good parts). It's kind of little internal DSL for
GUI's. You'll stop manually creating boring repetitive code like:

    (doto (JFrame.)
      (.setA "A")
      (.setB "B")
      (.addXxxListener (reify ...))
      ...)

Instead all the boilerplate will be generated by GUI FTW! and you'll
never need to look at code like that again.

The before-mentioned **good parts** of the Web include:

<ol>
<li>a <b>GUI structure tree</b> (say, like HTML but in Clojure),
<pre><code>[JFrame [\*id :main-window]
  [JButton [\*id :super-button]]]</code></pre>
</li>
<li><b>Cascade Style Sheets</b> (say, like CSS but in Clojure),
<pre><code>[:main-window] [:title "Window FTW!", :visible true]
[:super-button] [:text "Make something happen!"]</code></pre>
</li>
<li><b>hooking functions into events</b> (say, like JavaScript but in Clojure).
<pre><code>[:super-button] [:action++performed (fn [state event] ...)]</code></pre>
</li>
</ol>

The bad parts would be using XML and JavaScript literally ;) .
Actually, the CSS part look and works like original CSS. It just
doesn't have those fancy selectors yet.

## SWT FTW! (and swing too...)

<p class="sidenote">[1] Well, for toolkits that follow the same pattern
that SWT and Swing do.</p>
<p class="sidenote">[2] Notice that
[swt](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/blob/9febcf9559cade88394e9fc66a91d0a9bffdb499/src/guiftw/swt.clj#L13)
is just a wrapper around `parse-gui` and `swt-create`).</p>

GUI FTW works with SWT! It's because it's an **abstract**
library. Neither Swing nor SWT stuff are hard-coded. And GUI FTW needs
only one function to be implemented to support another toolkit. [1] And those functions are
simple as
[swt-create](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/blob/9febcf9559cade88394e9fc66a91d0a9bffdb499/src/guiftw/swt.clj#L8). [2]

## Reusability

What's created with GUI FTW! is always reusable: you'll get a function
to instantiate your GUI as many times as you want to. Also, style
sheets are list of function-like objects that applies some properties
to objects. You can mix different GUI's with different style sheets at
runtime freely. This paragraph is here in case of thought that
everything is written using macros flew across someone's mind ;)
. Actually, I've tried to minimize use of macros.

## More?

I've setup a wiki on GitHub and even wrote a tutorial for GUI
FTW!. Here's a couple of links you'd likely be interested in:

- [Project Page](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW)
- [Wiki](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/wiki)
- [Overview](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/wiki/Overview)
- [One **Tutorial** For All](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/wiki/One-Tutorial-For-All) (including Swing *and* SWT)
- [Online Docs](http://longstandingbug.com/GUIFTW)

## What's New?

Since the
[original announcement in Polish](niech-sie-stanie-gui-ftw.html) I've
added couple of things, most important runtime state handling, support
for custom "special properties" and for custom
"[adders](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/issues/1)" (Swing only).

### State in Sane Manner

After creating a widget you'll get a map wrapped with atom which I call
"GUI state". It contains data about identifiers, groups, and root of
the widget tree. Any other additional data can be added by user. Every
event handler fn will get that state as first argument. You can query
state like this:

    (-> @state :ids :asdf)    ;; get object with id :asdf
    (-> @state :groups :qwer) ;; get list of objects in group :qwer
    (-> @state :root)         ;; get root, usually the window

When creating widgets you either pass state explicitly or a new one
is created for you. You can also decide which parts of window share
state and which doesn't.

For more info check out last part of
[Overview](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/wiki/Overview) on wiki.

### Custom "Adders"

I knew that the day will come that I get hit by some Swing or SWT
-specific quirk. So I got an
[issue](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/issues/1) :) (Thanks to the
Reporter, by the way).

Everything is sweet and honey in Swing when you can use method `add`
to add object to its parent. But there are some cases when Swing
designers broke that pattern, most notably the
[JTabbedPane](http://download.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/javax/swing/JTabbedPane.html)
when you have to use `addTab` method. So now (only in Swing, SWT has
different "parenting" scheme) you can set `:*adder` property to change
default behavior. Adder is just a function that takes 4 arguments
`[parent parent-style child child-style]` and does whatever is
needed. For `JTabbedPane` it would be:

    (fn [parent parent-style child child-style]
      (.addTab parent (-> child-style :specials :*tab-title) child))

There's also a case of
[JScrollPane](http://download.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/javax/swing/JScrollPane.html)
where the `setViewportView` method should be used. When you want to
have scroll controls on `JTextArea`, you have to wrap a `JScrollPane`
around it. So it sounds like putting text area into scroll pane. So
for this scenario we'd write:

    [JScrollPane [:*adder (fn [parent _ child _]
                            (.setViewportView parent child))]
     [JTextArea]]

instead of `[JScrollPane [:viewport-view (JTextArea.)]]` which breaks
flow of the tree (and you can't use other goodness of GUI FTW! for the
text area object like styles or grouping).

There's a [fancy example](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/blob/master/src/guiftw/examples/swing/custom_adders.clj) using those two.

## Why Bother the Programmer?

<p class="sidenote">
[3] Good luck with that, I live on 10th floor :P.
</p>

If you look at my
[TODO](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/blob/9febcf9559cade88394e9fc66a91d0a9bffdb499/TODO.md)
list you will see that I plan to put those quirks in special style
sheet in `guiftw.swing`. I also consider using this style sheet by
default in Swing. If you know any **other cases** that should be
included, *please* let me know, either by
[creating an issue](https://github.com/santamon/GUIFTW/issues),
[mailing me](http://longstandingbug.com/info.html) or throwing a brick
at my window. [3]
